\acknowledgements{\addtocontents{toc}{\vspace{1em}} % Add a gap in the Contents, for aesthetics
%\begin{acknowledgements}

The first person I would like to thank is my supervisor Thorsten
Altenkirch. He offered me a great internship opportunity about
encoding numbers in Agda, which later developed into my PhD
project. He was always patient in answering questions and taught me a
lot about research. I would also like to thank him for his guidance
and feedback on this thesis. I would also thank my second supervisor
Thomas Anberr√©e who introduced me to functional programming and gave
me precious advice on my project. I would also like to thank Venanzio
Capretta who examined my first and second year reports and provided me
with helpful feedback.

I would like to thank Ambrus Kaposi and Nicolai Kraus for their great
help in writing my thesis and comments on my drafts. My friends
Nicolai Kraus, Ambrus Kaposi, Christian Sattler, Paolo Capriotti,
Florent Balestrieri, Gabe Dijkstra, Ivan Perez, Neil Sculthorpe and
all the other PhD students in our lab helped me a lot by either
teaching me mathematics, discussing research topics or playing
badminton to exercise our bodies. The Functional Programming Lab is
like a lively family and I really enjoyed the time here. I would like
to thank everyone here. Without their kind help, the thesis would not
have been finished.


I would also like to thank the organizers and other participants of
the special year on \hott at the Institute for Advanced Study where we
had many interesting discussions some of which were related to parts
of this work, especially Guillaume Brunerie whose proposal made it
possible. I would also like to thank F. Nordvall Forsberg with whom we
had important discussions related to our work.

I would also like to thank my parents and other family members.
During the years in Nottingham, my mother Guangfei Lv and my father
Youyuan Li were always very supportive of me, even though I was living
far from them. They talked to me a lot and sent my favourite foods to
me many times. My aunt Guangshu Lv who is living in Germany also
helped me a lot. She gave me many advice and has sent mails to
me. Without their support I would have never achieved my goals.

Finally, I would like to thank the School of Computer Science and the
International Office at the University of Nottingham who financially
supported this project by providing a scholarship.

%\end{acknowledgements}

}
